Traditional psychological skills training (PST)  approaches have one core assumption. That is, in order to perform better on the outside (e.g. run better, swim faster), we must invest time changing what exists on the inside (thoughts and feelings). This belief in cause (positive thoughts and feelings) and effect (effective performance) is the pre-eminent psychological paradigm in the world today and it leads to a significant focus on attempts to make our internal worlds more positive so that we can perform well. This makes intuitive sense, but is flawed for a range below reasons: When we tell ourselves that we need to feel good to perform, we are also telling ourselves that when we don’t feel good we won’t perform (this is due to how language learning works, We are human – and humans don’t feel good all the time, It’s equally possible that the direction of causality is reversed i.e. doing good leads to feeling good, not the other way around, We may be training ourselves to choose activities that make us feel good in the short term even if these don’t serve us well in the long term.

There is an emerging body of psychological literature which is now being applied to sport (selected journal references provided at the end) that starts from a different core assumption. That is, instead of trying to change the content of our inner world, we should work to change our perspective about our internal world. This new way of conceptualising mental work suggests that activities which focus on changing the content of our thinking simply create a more intricate web of connected thoughts that often make things worse not better. Instead, we should place greater emphasis on knowing the difference between the outside world of actions like playing sport, and the internal world of thoughts, feelings, urges and sensations (nerves, self-doubt, frustration etc).This capacity to know the difference between what’s on the inside and what is on the outside enables us to choose committed action in service of what’s important to us (values-directed goals). Importantly, the aim in this new paradigm is not to achieve a specific ‘optimal’ internal state (e.g. arousal level), it is to increase our willingness to experience whatever internal state we happen to be in and to choose behaviours that help us do what matters in that moment irrespective of what’s happening on the inside.

This new way of thinking has emerged from a cognitive therapy model called Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) and has been termed Psychological Flexibility and is fundamentally different to the more rigid (i.e. a single optimal way to think and feel) traditional approaches that you will find if you open pretty much any sport psychology text book today.
Consider the continuums provided below to evaluate your own beliefs about the mental side of performance? If you selected items down the left then your beliefs align more with the traditional approaches to psychology like PST. If you selected items down the right then your beliefs align more to the psychological flexibility approaches.
ACT researchers have been working for many years on developing a clear understanding of the specific skills that will increase our levels of psychological flexibility. They include:

1) Open up to our internal experience (through unhooking from difficult thoughts and building a curious awareness of feelings and sensations)
2) Be present (through a range of mindfulness skills and an understanding of how our inner desires to be special or significant can lead us to spend time in either the past or the future)
3) Do what matters (in service of values and goals, despite inner challenge).

The skills of psychological flexibility – like all sport skills – take a while to master but can yield significant results. When athletes drop the struggle with their internal experience, they often report having greater capacity to make decisions in a race. When athletes open up to sensations of pain with curiosity rather than aversion, they often report an increased capacity to tolerate greater levels of pain and therefore maintain performance. Our goal with performance psychology is to enable consistent performance over time and in particular when we are under pressure. Psychological flexibility approaches offer the athlete and coach a unique set of skills to take their performance to another level.