 Neuropsychiatric Disabilities (NPF)

Neuropsychiatric disabilities (NPF) is an umbrella term for various diagnoses, the most common of which are ADHD (which stands for hyperactivity syndrome with attention deficit disorder) and autism/Asperger's syndrome.

In simple terms, you can say that the brains of people with NPD work and function in a different way, which can result in them having difficulties in different areas. However, it is important to know that NPF does not have to do with intelligence.

It is assumed that people with NPD are overrepresented in sports because it can feel positive with physical activity and movement for these people. The structure that sport offers can often be appreciated by people with NPD. Additionally, when individuals with NPF enter into an activity that they enjoy, such as a sport, they often do so fully. One of the most successful athletes of all time, swimmer Michael Phelps, has spoken about his ADHD diagnosis. 

 
Symptom
Since it is difficult to draw clear boundaries between the different NPF diagnoses, and since it is not uncommon for people with NPF to have symptoms of several diagnoses, we will talk about NPF in a broad sense.

If you suffer from NPF, you may have difficulties in the following areas:

Attention. You find it difficult to concentrate on something for a long time, especially if you are not interested in the subject. You forget or lose things. You may find that you have many thoughts in your head at the same time. You may find it difficult to follow instructions. You find it hard to write or read.
Activity. You may feel restless and find it difficult to sit still (e.g. at school or work). You have the energy to be physically active for a long time, which can lead to you choosing to do a lot of sports.
You have a tendency to do things immediately, without thinking.
Social interaction. It can be difficult for you to interpret social cues, such as body language and facial expressions. If you want to understand what others mean, they need to express themselves very clearly. It is also difficult for you to use such signals yourself. You find it complicated to communicate with others and you often feel that you are not understood. You may find that it is problematic to have relationships with, for example, friends, family members or teammates.
Sensitivity to sensory impressions. Your sensory impressions, such as smell, sight, and hearing, seem to be enhanced. This can cause you to experience chafing of clothes or certain sounds and smells being very disturbing or unpleasant.
Change and structure. It can feel stressful when you need to do something that is new or unfamiliar to you. You may also find that it is difficult to organize and plan things. However, you feel good when you receive clear information and have the opportunity to prepare for what is going to happen.
You find it easy to engage in and focus on topics that interest you, but feel resistance when you have to absorb information that you are not interested in. You find it difficult to get started with things and can quickly get tired of an activity. However, if any activity really interests you, it can occupy a large part of your time and you show high motivation.

What can you do yourself?
Below are some tips that can make everyday life with NPD a little easier:

Enter everything you need to do in a calendar (e.g. the one on your phone).
If you have a time to fit, write down where you are going, when you have to leave home and approximately how long the meeting or visit will be. Add a reminder to your phone so it rings when you're ready to get ready.
It can help to make a clear schedule for the week, where you write down all your activities, such as school/work and training. In this schedule, you can also plan recovery, so that it happens. Make such a weekly schedule for each week.
Work on a "to-do" list. Try to avoid having many different notes with information. Instead, gather all your "to-do" in, for example, school/work and training in one place. This makes it easier for you to get an overview of everything that needs to be done and can tick off when you have done something.
Wear hearing protection when you have to concentrate. If you know that you are easily disturbed by noise, it can help. Naps with music can also work.
Acquire knowledge about NPF. Then you can understand yourself better and it can make life easier.
Do relaxation exercises if you are easily stressed.
Take care of your sleep. If you have trouble falling asleep, take a look at the tips in the sections Sleep and Sleep problems.
Be kind to yourself. Try not to value everything you do and how you are as a person.