## Physiotherapy for neck, shoulder and back problems. If you have pain in your back, shoulders and neck, you can get treatment with physiotherapy. Then you can get help with your problems, often with the help of movement and exercise in various forms. You can also get help to change your lifestyle. The physiotherapist examines, among other things, how you move, if and where you have pain, how the joints work and how the strength of the muscles works. Some examinations are done by the physiotherapist with their hands to get a feel for how a movement, muscle or joint works.

Treatment is based on your symptoms and on the assessment that the examination has led to. You may need to train the strength and endurance of a muscle or train the stability around a joint. You may also need to learn how to control a particular movement. The physiotherapist teaches you to use your body in a way that can reduce the symptoms and prevent the problems from returning. You can also get help with managing pain and stress. You will get tips on how to change your living habits.
Sometimes you may receive manual treatment. In this case, the physiotherapist treats a joint or muscle with their hands. This is done to relieve the pain and get the joint or muscle to function normally again. You can also get advice from a physiotherapist on what you can do yourself to reduce the pain. They can also give advice on how you can best use your body even if you are in pain. For example, if you have pain in your hand or arm or neck problems, you can get advice on how to sit, walk or change your posture to get less pain. You can also get help trying out different aids such as a special keyboard or an ergonomic mouse. Your workplace may also need to be adapted so that you can work in an ergonomic way. Stress, worry and anxiety can amplify pain in the back and shoulders. Then methods such as body awareness, stress management and various relaxation exercises can help. During treatment, you can also get advice on how best to use your body to prevent problems in the future. It can be about changing things that make you hurt. It can be anything from improving a bad atmosphere in the workplace to finding a good sitting position or the right lifting technique.