Mental health is regarded as the psychological and emotional well-being of a person. It is reflected in the positive functioning in life based on the interaction between social and biological factors. The World Health Organization has defined mental health as "a state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and can make a contribution to his or her community".

Sports is another important activity that contributes to the mental health of youth. The importance of sports among the students is valuable and goes beyond physical activity. The stress level of college students is higher than the other age groups, which can adversely affect their mental health. Stress is usually caused by academic pressures, which can lead to terrible effects and further results in future failure. However, sports has played a drastic role in reducing the students stress levels and increasing happiness and psychological well-being.

Physical activity is considered an important predictor of health, especially among the youth and is used as a preventive measure against mental illness. Physical activity is defined as the bodily movement by the skeletal muscles that requires the expenditure of energy. Physical activity is reported to have an antidepressant influence on individuals. Exercise is a subset of the physical activity  which is a planned and structured activity for enhancing physical fitness that involves running or weight training. Furthermore, physical activity also has psychological benefits that may positively influence mental health. Based on the bio-psychosocial model , numerous empirical studies, and systematic reviews confirm physical activity as a predominant predictor of mental health. Therefore, physical activity is reflected as a key strategy for improving the individual's mental health and well-being benefits. Physical activity comprises structured, supervised exercise programs, active commuting, domestic activities, and leisure physical activities. Regular Physical activity is a key health behavior from the public health perspective due to its remarkable effect on health. Physical activity has the potential to prevent mental health disorders and issues that comprise depression and anxiety.

Sports is reflected as another preventive strategy for mental health problems. It is defined by athletic games institutionalized in several ways. Sports is a game that involves physical exertion and skills in which an individual or a team competes for entertainment. However, the study conducted by Malm et al. (2019) has demonstrated that although sports enhances the physical as well as the psychological health of individuals, it may adversely affect mental health due to the risk of injury, burnout, and eating disorders. The negative impact is commonly observed among the elite players as they are required to perform at maximum to get the desired outcomes. As a result, this can cause a negative effect on the mental health of the elite-level players. On the other hand, Eigenschenk et al. (2019) indicated that outdoor sports can create positive benefits for mental health as it can cure the mental health problems. Furthermore, engagement in sports positively affects general health and psychological ability by increasing well-being, improving quality of life, and enhancing happiness and life satisfaction. Engaging in 15 minutes of Physical activity every day reduces the risk of sadness and anxiety by 26%. Adopting a regular fitness routine lowers the chances of relapsing. Physical activity generates various favorable changes in the brain, making it a reliable therapeutic for psychiatric illnesses. The generation of endorphins contributes to a sense of relaxation and well-being. These activities also diverge negative emotions and other factors that contribute to depression and stress. That is, Physical activity significantly enhances mental well-being among students.

Furthermore, the study has found sport performance positively predicted mental health. Increased sport and exercise enhances psychological well-being. In addition, sports are represented in another mental health prevention plan, where they are described as athletic games that are organized in various ways. Jukic et al. (2020) stated that sports involve physical effort and talent in which individuals or teams compete against one another for enjoyment. Eigenschenk et al. (2019) has indicated that outdoor activities provide good advantages for mental health through curing mental health issues. By promoting well-being, improving life, and boosting pleasure and life happiness, participation in sports has a favorable influence on overall health and mental ability. 