## Psychotherapeutic Interventions in Sport Psychology
Many recommendations have been put forward about how to address mental health problems and disorders in sport contexts, such as prevention strategies, mental health officers , and new screening tools to detect symptoms of mental health problems. Surprisingly, very few of these recommendations include calls for more rigorous and controlled studies on psychotherapeutic interventions for athletes. Intervention research has mainly focused on performance enhancement , although the constant pressure to perform may increase athletes’ vulnerability to mental health problems. The scarcity of research on interventions for athletes’ mental health problems and disorders has resulted in a critical knowledge gap related to the effectiveness of interventions and the underlying mechanisms that account for intervention outcomes.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has been recommended as an “excellent choice” for treating athletes with mental health problems or disorders because it involves procedures that athletes commonly use, such as structure, direction, goal setting, and practice . However, to our knowledge, there are no studies conducted on the effectiveness of CBT on athletes with established mental health problems or disorders. Nevertheless, given that CBT is a well-researched form of psychotherapy and established as one of the most effective and common treatments for a wide range of mental health problems and disorders , it is understandable why CBT is recommended. Despite the lack of clinical studies using CBT for mental health problems or disorders in athlete populations, a limited number of case studies have been conducted using CBT principles with athletes. In addition to CBT, so-called third-wave behavioral therapies such as acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) and compassion-focused therapy (CFT) seem promising and should also be evaluated in athlete populations. ACT stems from the traditional behavior and cognitive therapies, such as CBT, but with a stronger emphasis on mindfulness and acceptance . ACT has been widely researched in clinical samples with strong evidence for a wide range of mental health problems, such as anxiety, and chronic pain . Since introducing ACT, many interventions in sport psychology have drawn from the ACT model and its six core processes (i.e., values, contact with the present moment, committed action, acceptance, self as a context, and defusion). Sport psychology researchers have mostly adopted the parts about being present in the moment and accepting internal events (i.e., thoughts and emotions) to enhance performance (e.g., The Mindfulness-Acceptance-Commitment approach). However, the field currently lacks clinical intervention studies testing the ACT model as a psychotherapeutic intervention in athletes with mental health problems or disorders.

A small number of intervention studies in sport contexts have included parts of the ACT model . However, in these studies, participants were recruited based on characteristics related to their sport participation (e.g., current injury, motivation to participate), not that they explicitly needed treatment for mental health problems or disorders. It is difficult to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of an intervention on mental health problems (e.g., anxiety, depression, and psychological rigidity) based on research with healthy samples. Research on compassion-based interventions in sport is also scarce but is gaining interest . However, despite an increased interest, a scoping review  on the role of self-compassion in competitive sport settings only found one intervention study. Given the lack of empirical evidence, athletes experiencing mental health problems or disorders need to be included in future studies to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions based on CBT, ACT, or CFT.

Researchers in the field of sport psychology seem to agree that mental health problems are more than just specific disorders and that the full range of mental health problems need to be considered. In addition, due to issues such as categorical overlap and high comorbidity rates, recognition is growing in terms of acknowledging that traditional psychiatric diagnoses are flawed due to the limitations (e.g., topographical approach, syndromal classification, and diagnosis overlap) of the current DSM-5 diagnostic system, and thus the treatments of them. Because of this, the field of clinical psychology is advancing toward transdiagnostic approaches aimed at targeting underlying mechanisms (e.g., emotional and cognitive avoidance, attentional focus, and worry) hypothesized to drive and maintain a person’s mental health problems. The field of sport psychology would benefit from following this trend and research on how transdiagnostic approaches (e.g., ACT and CFT) can be used in interventions with athletes is warranted. Well-designed clinical studies evaluating established psychotherapeutic interventions in athletes should be prioritized over developing new, comprehensive, targeted, and disorder-specific treatment models.

