## Mental health among elite youth athletes

Some pressures that are unique to elite youth athletes include early specialization and over-training, having critical or demanding coaches and parents, poor sleep, and trying to balance educational and social needs with increasingly professionalized sporting demands. These factors can all affect the well-being of youth elite athletes.
Perhaps especially related to elite sport, young people around the world are reporting unprecedented levels of perfectionism. Perfectionism is common among athletes, and strongly linked with poor mental health outcomes.

Beyond the pressures of elite sport environments, young people experience the heaviest burden of mental ill-health. For young people around the world, the peak age at onset for a mental health disorder is 15, and approximately half of these disorders occur before the age of 18. There are many reasons why young people’s mental health is at such high risk, including increasingly troubling global conflicts and climate change, parental unemployment, and economic prospects.

A key focus for supporting the mental health of elite youth athletes involves creating youth sport contexts that are protective for mental health. Elite youth sports environments need to be psychologically safe and free from abuse and harassment.

A large responsibility sits with parents and coaches, who must avoid overly critical or demanding behaviours and instead engage with young people in supportive ways. Sport organizations should prioritize well-being and healthy development among youth athletes.

Early detection is important to help elite youth athletes get the support they need. Warning signs of mental health concerns can include changes in an athlete’s emotions, mood, behaviours, sleep and appetite. Coaches and parents play important roles in noticing changes in athletes’ mental health, and they can help by opening up conversations about mental health among youth athletes.

Listening without judgment, asking athletes what they think they might need, and offering to help them find places to seek support are all helpful strategies when talking about mental health concerns.

Elite youth athletes and their parents may benefit by seeking support from a psychologist, psychotherapist or psychiatrist who specializes in working with athletes.